the audience.
4.1.2 manner is comprised of many separate elements. some but not all of these elements are listed below.
4.2 the elements of style
4.2.1 the elements of style include eye contact voice modulation hand gestures language the use of notes and any other element which may affect the effectiveness of the presentation of the member.
4.2.2 eye contact will generally assist a member to persuade an audience as it allows the member to appear more sincere.
4.2.3 voice modulation will generally assist a member to persuade an audience as the debater may emphasise important arguments and keep the attention of the audience. this includes the pitch tone and volume of the member’s voice and the use of pauses.
4.2.4 hand gestures will generally assist a member to emphasise important arguments. excessive hand movements may however be distracting and reduce the attentiveness of the audience to the arguments.
4.2.5 language should be clear and simple. members who use language which is too verbose or confusing may detract from the argument if they lose the attention of the audience.
4.2.6 the use of notes is permitted but members should be careful that they do not rely on their notes too much and detract from the other elements of manner.
4.3 the elements of structure
4.3.1 the elements of structure include the structure of the speech of the member and the structure of the speech of the team.
4.3.2 the matter of the speech of each member must be structured. the member should organise his or her matter to improve the effectiveness of their presentation. the substantive speech of each members should

4.3.3 the matter of the team must be structured. the team should organise their matter to improve the effectiveness of their presentation. the team should
a contain a consistent approach to the issues being debated and
b allocate positive matter to each member where both members of the team are introducing positive matter and
a include an introduction conclusion and a series of arguments and
b be well-timed in accordance with the time limitations and the need to prioritise and apportion time to matter.
4.4 assessing manner
4.4.1 adjudicators should assess the elements of manner together in order to determine the overall effectiveness of the member’s presentation. adjudicators should assess whether the member’s presentation is assisted or diminished by their manner.
4.4.2 adjudicators should be aware that at a world championship there are many styles which are appropriate and that they should not discriminate against a member simply because the manner would be deemed ‘inappropriate parliamentary debating’ in their own country.
4.4.3 adjudicators should not allow bias to influence their assessment. members should not be discriminated against on the basis of religion sex race colour nationality language subject to rule 4.2.4 sexual preference age social status or disability.

part 5 — the adjudication
5.1 the role of the adjudicator
