5.1.1 the adjudicator must a confer upon and discuss the debate with the other adjudicators
b determine the rankings of the teams
c determine the team grades
d determine the speaker marks
e provide a verbal adjudication to the members and
f complete any documentation required by the tournament.5.1.2 the adjudication panel should attempt to agree on the adjudication of the debate. adjudicators should therefore confer in a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect
5.1.3 adjudicators should acknowledge that adjudicators on a panel may form different or opposite views of the debate. adjudicators should therefore attempt to base their conclusions on these rules in order to limit subjectivity and to provide a consistent approach to the assessment of debates.
5.2 ranking teams
5.2.1 teams should be ranked from first place to last place. first placed teams should be awarded three points second placed teams should be awarded two points third placed teams should be awarded one point and fourth placed teams should be awarded zero points.
5.2.2 teams may receive zero points where they fail to arrive at the debate more than five minutes after the scheduled time for debate.
5.2.3 teams may receive zero points where the adjudicators unanimously agree that the member has or members have harassed another debater on the basis of religion sex race colour nationality sexual preference or disability.
5.2.4 adjudicators should confer upon team rankings. where a unanimous decision cannot be reached after conferral the decision of the majority will determine the rankings. where a majority decision cannot be reached the chair of the panel of adjudicators will determine the rankings.
5.3 grading and marking the teams
5.3.1 the panel of adjudicators should agree upon the grade that each team is to be awarded. each adjudicator may then mark the teams at their discretion but within the agreed grade. where there is a member of the panel who has dissented in the ranking of the teams that adjudicator will not need to agree upon the team grades and may complete their score sheet at their own discretion.
5.3.2 team grades and marks should be given the following interpretation
grade 
marks 
meaning
a 
180-200 
excellent to flawless. the standard you would expect to see from a team at the semi final / grand final level of the tournament. the team has many strengths and few if any weaknesses.
b 
160-179 
above average to very good. the standard you would expect to see from a team at the finals level or in contention to make to the finals. the team has clear strengths and some minor weaknesses.
c 
