
closing opposition
 member for the opposition or third opposition member and
 opposition whip or fourth opposition member.

1.1.4 members will deliver a substantive speech of seven minutes duration and should offer points of information while members of the opposing teams are speaking.
1.2 the motion
1.2.1 the motion should be unambiguously worded.
1.2.2 the motion should reflect that the world universities debating championship is an international tournament.
1.2.3 the members should debate the motion in the spirit of the motion and the tournament.
1.3 preparation
1.3.1 the debate should commence 15 minutes after the motion is announced.
1.3.2 teams should arrive at their debate within five minutes of the scheduled starting time for that debate.
1.3.3 members are permitted to use printed or written material during preparation and during the debate. printed material includes books journals newspapers and other similar materials. the use of electronic equipment is prohibited during preparation and in the debate.
1.4 points of information
1.4.1 points of information questions directed to the member speaking may be asked between first minute mark and the six-minute mark of the members’ speeches speeches are of seven minutes duration.
1.4.2 to ask a point of information a member should stand place one hand on his or her head and extend the other towards the member speaking. the member may announce that they would like to ask a point of information or use other words to this effect.
1.4.3 the member who is speaking may accept or decline to answer the point of information.
1.4.4 points of information should not exceed 15 seconds in length.
1.4.5 the member who is speaking may ask the person offering the point of information to sit down where the offeror has had a reasonable opportunity to be heard and understood.
1.4.6 members should attempt to answer at least two points of information during their speech. members should also offer points of information.
1.4.7 points of information should be assessed in accordance with clause 3.3.4 of these rules.
1.4.8 points of order and points of personal privilege are not permitted.
1.5 timing of the speeches
1.5.1 speeches should be seven minutes in duration this should be signaled by two strikes of the gavel. speeches over seven minutes and 15 seconds may be penalised.
