1.5.2 points of information may only be offered between the first minute mark and the six minute mark of the speech this period should be signaled by one strike of the gavel at the first minute and one strike at the sixth minute.
1.5.3 it is the duty of the speaker of the house to time speeches.
1.5.4 in the absence of the speaker of the house it is the duty of the chair of the adjudication panel to ensure that speeches are timed.
1.6 the adjudication
1.6.1 the debate should be adjudicated by a panel of at least three adjudicators where this is possible.
1.6.2 at the conclusion of the debate the adjudicators should confer and rank the teams from first placed to last placed. see part 5 the adjudication.
1.6.3 there will be verbal adjudication of the debate after the first six preliminary rounds of the tournament. the verbal adjudication should be delivered in accordance with clause 5.5 of these rules.

part 2 — definitions
2.1 the definition
2.1.1 the definition should state the issue or issues for debate arising out of the motion and state the meaning of any terms in the motion which require interpretation.
2.1.2 the prime minister should provide the definition at the beginning of his or her speech.
2.1.3 the definition must
a have a clear and logical link to the motion - this means that an average reasonable person would accept the link made by the member between the motion and the definition where there is no such link the definition is sometimes referred to as a squirrel
b not be self-proving - a definition is self-proving when the case is that something should or should not be done and there is no reasonable rebuttal. a definition is may also be self-proving when the case is that a certain state of affairs exists or does not exist and there is no reasonable rebuttal these definitions are sometimes referred to as truisms.
c not be time set - this means that the debate must take place in the present and that the definition cannot set the debate in the past or the future and
d not be place set unfairly - this means that the definition cannot restrict the debate so narrowly to a particular geographical or political location that a participant of the tournament could not reasonably be expected to have knowledge of the place.
2.2 challenging the definition
2.2.1 the leader of the opposition may challenge the definition if it violates clause 2.1.3 of these rules. the leader of the opposition should clearly state that he or she is challenging the definition.
2.2.2 the leader of the opposition should substitute an alternative definition after challenging the definition of the prime minister.
2.3 assessing the definitional challenge
2.3.1 the adjudicator should determine the definition to be ‘unreasonable’ where it violates clause 2.1.3 of these rules.
2.3.2 the onus to establish that the definition is unreasonable is on the members asserting that the definition is unreasonable.
2.3.3 where the definition is unreasonable the opposition should substitute an alternative definition that should be accepted by the adjudicator provided it is not unreasonable.
2.3.4 where the definition of the opening government is unreasonable and an alternative definition is substituted by the opening opposition the closing government may introduce matter which is inconsistent with the matter presented by the opening government and consistent with the definition of the opening opposition.
