2.3.5 if the opening opposition has substituted a definition that is also unreasonable the closing government may challenge the definition of the opening opposition and substitute an alternative definition.
2.3.6 if the closing government has substituted a definition that is also unreasonable in addition to the unreasonable definitions of the opening government and opening opposition the closing opposition may challenge the definition of the closing government and substitute an alternative definition.

part 3 — matter
3.1 the definition of matter
 3.1.1 matter is the content of the speech. it is the arguments a debater uses to further his or her case and persuade the audience.
3.1.2 matter includes arguments and reasoning examples case studies facts and any other material that attempts to further the case.
3.1.3 matter includes positive or substantive material and rebuttal arguments specifically aimed to refute the arguments of the opposing teams. matter includes points of information.
3.2 the elements of matter
3.2.1 matter should be relevant logical and consistent.
3.2.2 matter should be relevant. it should relate to the issues of the debate positive material should support the case being presented and rebuttal should refute the material being presented by the opposing teams. the member should appropriately prioritize and apportion time to the dynamic issues of the debate.
3.2.3 matter should be logical. arguments should be developed logically in order to be clear and well reasoned and therefore plausible. the conclusion of all arguments should support the member’s case.
3.2.4 matter should be consistent. members should ensure that the matter they present is consistent within their speech their team and the remainder of the members on their side of the debate subject to clauses 2.3.4 2.3.5 or 2.3.6 of these rules.
3.2.5 all members should present positive matter except the final two members in the debate and all members should present rebuttal except the first member in the debate. the government whip may choose to present positive matter.
3.2.6 all members should attempt to answer at least two points of information during their own speech and offer points of information during opposing speeches.

3.3 assessing matter
3.3.1 the matter presented should be persuasive. ‘the elements of matter’ should assist an adjudicator to assess the persuasiveness and credibility of the matter presented.
3.3.2 matter should be assessed from the viewpoint of the average reasonable person. adjudicators should analyze the matter presented and assess its persuasiveness while disregarding any specialist knowledge they may have on the issue of the debate.
3.3.3 adjudicators should not allow bias to influence their assessment. debaters should not be discriminated against on the basis of religion sex race color nationality sexual preference age social status or disability.
3.3.4 points of information should be assessed according to the effect they have on the persuasiveness of the cases of both the member answering the point of information and the member offering the point of information.

part 4 — manner
4.1 the definition of manner
 4.1.1 manner is the presentation of the speech. it is the style and structure a member uses to further his or her case and persuade the audience.
